From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes.
Oh, weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three 94. Recorded live
Thursday, October 17th, 2013. This episode of
Hansel minutes is brought to
you by cellaring offering the
best in developer tools and
support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net makers of gesture
pack a powerful gesture, recording
and recognition system for Microsoft
connect for windows developers details.
Add gesture, pa.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Diane Marsh
about the rise of Scala.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I'm talking
to Diane Marsh from Netflix director
of engineering for cloud tools.
Thanks for chatting with me
today. Thanks Scott. Glad to
be here. I was really
happy to have another Netflix
person on I talking about
groovy on grails a couple
of weeks ago, clay McCoy,
but you are a Scala
fan. Talk to me about
Scala. That sounds really like
I need a PhD to
use. Well, funny you say
that because that has sort
of been the myth perpetuated
in the community over the
last couple of years. I
think it's starting to change
is, you know, I, I
approached Bruce Eckel about writing
a book about Scala a
few years ago for the
sole purpose of helping to
debunk that myth we had,
we had been hearing over
and over and over again,
scholars hard it's it's too
terse. It's too Pearl. Like,
and that hadn't been my
experience at all. So I'm
friends with Bruce Eckel and
I, I was at a
conference with him and I
S I just approached him
and said, what do you
think about me writing a,
a book on introduction to
Scala, sort of letting people
know the scholar is not
hard and showing them my
experience. And he paused for
a moment. And he said,
I'd like to help you
write that book, which was,
I know incredibly generous, you
know, I wasn't really where
I was going, but wow.
Blown over by the suggestion
and by the generosity, right.
And people who don't know
who Bruce Bruce echo is. He
is the author of thinking
in Java and thinking in
C plus plus. And I
might go so far as
to say thinking in curly
braces. So I'm surprised he
was so enthusiastic about a
scholar. I mean, I know
he's a programming language enthusiastic
and has done lots of
lectures and is arguably agnostic
in his understanding of, and
belief in the programming languages.
But wouldn't you say that
that Java, Java and C
plus plus, and those kinds
of languages are different than
scholar, scholar feels different? It's
it is more perlite and
it has, it, it, it's
not either of those languages.
I think it's on the
evolutionary scale. I think what
we're seeing is that programmers
like me started with C
and moved to C plus
plus, and then moved to
Java and, you know, played
and toyed with, with C-sharp
for awhile, because I thought
that was fun and interesting,
but I really found my
home in Scala, where I
found that the, the expressiveness
of the language, the fact
that I don't have to
write all the boiler plate
code relieved me of a
lot of the annoyances of
writing in a language that
was developed a very long
time ago. So you think
that it's some of the
historical baggage that, that causes
us problems as we try
to solve new problems in
languages that were, that have
like 40 years of curly
brace baggage. I think what,
well, so I have some
strong opinions about this. I
think that some of the
newer developers come to us
having learned Java in college
and having used Java in
their jobs for years and
years and years, and never
having experienced the migration to
a new programming language. I
think that they've forgotten that
Java the language today is
not the same language that
they learned in college. It's
evolved with them. They've grown
with it. They've learned how
to bring in libraries that
did amazingly great things and
made their lives simpler. So
they've sort of eased into
the language, but it was
still called Java. So you
put a new language in
front of them, Scala, and
you add a functional programming
paradigm on top of that.
And now it seems really
scary and different. And I
think that part of the
problem is that we've sort
of, as an industry, lost
our muscle in learning new
languages. And I feel like
that's part of the problem
here. It's different, it's new
and it's scary. And then
when we add the functional
aspects on top of that,
it gets even more scary,
right? When someone looks at
scholar, remembering, of course that
we're on a podcast, you
know, what, what are they
going to see if they
don't know that scholar exists?
Are they going to say,
Oh, it looks like Python
or, Oh, but that doesn't
look right. That's not Python.
I mean, what does it
feel and look like visually.
Yeah, I guess it probably
looks a little bit like
Python. It looks a little
bit like Java. Some things
are a little bit disconcerting
about it because the, the
variable declarations, so the, the
type of the variable follows
the name of the variable.
So it's, it's variable name,
colon type, and which really
helps with type inference. Right?
So what you're buying is
type inference and what your,
the, the cost of that
is, you're seeing it slightly
different syntax. Is that required
if I sort of VAR
foo, do I have to
say colon title? No, you
don't. In fact, most of,
most of the time when
you're writing Scala code, you
won't necessarily define the type
you'll normally use type inference
where you'll see the types
is mainly when you're defining
either classes or in your,
and you're talking about the
arguments or the parameters for
that class, or when you're
defining methods on that class,
you'll see the types for
methods. And you'll see the
types for class definitions. You'll
also not see a constructor
because the, well, it won't
look like you're seeing a
constructor because when you say
class Fu and then parentheses,
and you, you list out
your parameters that becomes your
class definition, and it buys
you a lot of things.
It means that if you
have variables, defined parameters defined
to that class, those become
either private or public fields
in that class, depending on
how you've defined them. So
you get your getters and
setters for free, for example.
And so this is something
that just needs to be
pointed out to you once
you see it. It's really
cool. You may look past
it though and not see
it initially. I see. So
in something like Java or
C sharp, I'll say public
class point and then have
private X and Y, and
then have to go and
hook up the getters and
setters for the public properties
of X and Y. But
in Scala, I just say
class point and then Val
X, Val Y, and I
just had 10 less lines
of code. Really? Yeah. And
so it may seem subtle,
but when you said Val
X fail, why now you
get just the setters and
those, those are immutable variables.
You say VAR, X and
VAR. Why now you've got
variables and those become those,
those defined both getters and
setters. Wow. That is a
subtle one letter change. Their
valve versus VAR has completely
huge semantics that kind of
ripple through the system. If
you leave it off entirely,
then what you're getting is
private fields. Really. So if
I just say foo equals
one, that's just a private
and it's, it's kind of
inside of the class and
scope to the class. Yeah.
So if you say class
bar X, colon it, for
example, then that access private
to that class. So it
doesn't seem like it's as
verbose as, as, and again,
I kind of think about
the sea heritage of languages.
You know, if you look
at an example, a program
in Java, the scholar, one
is about two thirds of
the size Or less, maybe
one 30, even it's significantly
less than size. You just,
even to the point where,
you know, in Java, if
you're declaring a variable, you
have to declare the type
on both the left hand
side and the right hand
side. Right. You're doing it
on the right hand side.
You're declaring the type on
the left hand side in,
you're just saying VAR, blah
equals list one, two, three.
Right? So you're, you're not,
you're only saying list once
on the right hand side,
for example, they're even simpler
ways to do things like
that. So lots of verbosity
is removed from the language
and you do get to
leave off your semi-colons. So,
Oh, don't, don't tell Douglas
Crockford. So this, the, the
semantics are there though you've
removed the, the, the, the
sugar, but the meaning is
still there. Right? And it
does compile down to Java
byte code. So what you're
getting at the end of
the day is an application
that runs on the JVM,
and you're getting a lot
of compatibility with other languages
that are on the JVM,
calling into other languages from
Scala, calling Java, from Scala,
Scala, from Java. There's some
tricky things that you need
to be aware of when
you do that. But, you
know, for the most part,
that's something that you can
do, and you can kind
of sort of evolve your
code in your libraries to
reflect the fact that you're
using a new language, but
you don't have to go
wholesale and rewrite everything. Interesting.
So if I'm doing a
lot of type inference, and
then suddenly I reach a
border, a boundary where I
have to move into some
Java or some existing Java
classes that I've already written,
you know, what do I
have to do? Do I
have to say as instance
of, and then kind of
cast my dynamics down into
something that Java's going to
understand? No, because you're using
the Scala compiler, you're able
to bring in those classes
without, in, in sort of
a native Scala syntax. The
only difference is that, you
know, you're, you're bringing in
Java classes, so you may
run into some boundaries around
no pointer exceptions, which we
wouldn't normally see in Scala.
So, you know, you just
have to be a little
bit careful about that, but
as far as your you're
importing a Java class in
the same way that you
would import a scholar. Okay.
So that's on the consumption
side where a Scala class
wants to consume Java. What
about if Java wants to
consume Scala? Do I have
to then add the annotations
and type annotations at that
layer? Yeah. Then you're in
Java codes, then you're going
to have to follow all
of the Java, the Java
restrictions about what your, you
know, how you bring in
the scholar classes. But Java
arguably doesn't know, it doesn't
really care. It doesn't no,
it's the same as bringing
in any other JVM language.
Okay. So you can, and
I understand that you could
even, I mean, this is
operationally, it behaves like Java
cause ultimately is Java it's
in the JVM. And as
far as the JVM is
concerned, Scala code Java code
is not distinguishable. That's right.
And then, yeah. So one
of the, the things that
you get now is the
ability to be able to
migrate your code, you know,
sort of on a piecemeal
basis, migrate your, write new
code in Scala and, and
leave your old code in
Java. And that's a nice
approach. Some people take sort
of, I think it would
be unrealistic to expect that
people would Greenfield everything right.
And so this is a
really nice step into, into
Scala land. Another really nice
step into Scala land, you
know, to sort of build
confidence in your team around
learning Scala is to use
Scala test and Scala test
is a testing framework that
bill vendors' wrote, and it
allows you to actually test
your Java code using Scala
test. And it's a nice
BDD approach. And it can,
it's a really great framework
in its own, right. But
it also gives your team
sort of some experience with
writing Scala tests where it's
not in production code. You
know, they don't have to
feel concerned about, you know,
jumping wholesale into the language,
but yet they can get
that experience with, with Scala
in, in that sort of
a comfort, comfort level. And
some teams have found that
they liked Scala tests so
much that they've decided to
go into Scala for production
code as well. You know,
sort of, they got that
confidence. They're like, Hey, this
isn't so bad. And, and
you know, that's really what
I've been trying to promote
is the idea that it's,
it's not that scary. And
even if you use Scala
as a better Java, it's
better than Java. You know
what I mean? You know,
I think you probably remember
as I do the biggest
insult you could love yet
someone when they were going
from C to C plus
plus is, Oh, you're still
writing C and you're using
a C plus plus compiler,
you know? And, and so
I think we all feel
a little bruised by that.
Right. And like, we're ready
for the shoe to fall
where people are saying you're
writing Java and using a
scholar compiler. It's okay. Yeah.
Know, I think that people
will, their code will become
more idiomatic as they get
experienced with the language. Yeah.
Even if you don't use
any functional aspects to start,
I have to say that
it's in chanting, you know,
you get more experience with
the language and you, you
learn more about it and
you start saying, gosh, you
know, I could just use
immutable variables here because it's,
it's, it's, the variables are
immutable by default. Right. So
if I start using immutable
variables, then I, I learned
how to restructure my loops
in a different way. And
I learned a, maybe I
start heading down the path
of doing more recursion, you
know, and it sort of
spirits you in and you
learn it at your own
pace. You don't have to
jump in and be like,
all right, I'm all functional
today. You know, you can
really sort of ease yourself
into the whole experience. Yeah.
I think that turning to
learn to learn in another
language is one thing, learning
to write poetry in that
language is another thing. Like
someone asked me how well
I speak Spanish. And I
said,  because that's about
how well I speak Spanish.
You know what I mean?
I can order food, but
I am not writing poetry.
And I feel the same
way when I started learning
a new language. Like, you
know, can I order food
and F sharp? Sure. Can
I write poetry in F
sharp? Probably not. But if
the language is structured in
such a way that I
could say, all right, I'm
going to go ahead and
switch from Java for each
loops to the Scala for
expression. And I'm going to
do that in a nonthreatening
way in C sharp. Another
example would be like, you
know, really starting to embrace
link. You can either, you
can write idiomatic tight, clean,
poetic looking link expressions, or
just don't do it at
all. You know, you get
to pick and choose. So
it's good to know that
you don't have to go
whole hog into Scala world.
I think that's a really
great example because I learned
link in C-sharp at sort
of around the same time
that I was learning Scala.
I was sort of playing
with link at the same
time. And I saw a
lot of similarities between the
two. And I found that,
you know, as you learn
those concepts and those, those
idioms about how to use
something like link or, or,
or functional programming in general,
you start applying that to
all of the code that
you write, and you sort
of bring that into your
toolbox. And I think it
makes all of us better
programmers when we can just
have better, better, you know,
different tools that we can
apply in, in situations that
we find them necessary. I
think this is important for
younger programmers and I don't
mean by age, but inexperienced,
younger programmers too. To remember
that there are a class
of programmer out there that
have been writing for loops
and switch statements and wild
loops for 20 years. And,
you know, got a problem.
Let's write three, listed four
loops, and then you show
them something like in using
a four expression example in
scholars, say for something one
to something, if there's a,
you know, a case yield
and then wait a second,
you just took my nested
for loop and turned it
into one line. That's that's
too much. If you can
make that, that semantic jump
out of just kind of
classic procedural, cause you're effectively
writing basic, you know what
I mean? You're writing the
basic that you learned when
you were 13, except now
you're a, you've been an
engineer for 15 years and
you keep writing these same
four loops over and over
and over again, try to
pick one problem and solve
it in an idiomatic way.
And then that's now in
your toolbox and you'll recognize
it in other, in other
languages. Yeah. And then I
think the four expressions are
a great example and you
know, people that are familiar
with link, I think we'll
find four expressions and scholar
quite comfortable because there there's
a nice sort of comparison
there. Another really great thing
in Scala is magic expressions,
magic expressions, take pattern matching,
you know, all the way
to 11 with, with pattern
matching and Scala. It's interesting.
You mentioned that the naive
programmer. I remember when I
first started using case statements,
I guess it must've been,
I don't know whether it
was called case statements and
C or Pascal or whatever,
but you know, sort of
the equivalent of doing pattern
matching back then, I had
this sense that we should
be able to match on
things that weren't ordinal values.
You know, I wanted to
match on all kinds of
things and I was too
naive to realize that I
couldn't do that. So I
tried to do that. And
of course the compiler, you
know, whacked me and said,
you can't do that. You
can, you know, you have
to use ordinal values for
match expression or for in
that case pattern matching scholar
relieves you of that. So
in a sense, it takes
me back to my youth
where, you know, I was
naive enough to think I
should be able to do
this, and now I can,
you know, and so it's,
it's really great to have
features like that emerge in
the language. And, and the
fact, I guess, that's where
I see Scala as part
of the evolutionary scale. There've
been a lot of advances
in language features and a
lot of advances in, in
how we build languages and
how we pull concepts together.
I want the benefit of
that work that's happened over
the last 20 years. I
don't want to stay with
languages that were, you know,
prior to that and the
evolution. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Then
the case classes and pattern
matching and Scala is, does
so much in so few
lines that it, it's one
of those things where I
feel like when you feel
like learning Pearl, where you
just have to stare at
it for a minute and
just wait for the wait
for the knowledge to come,
I saw a quick sort
algorithm done using matches in
cases in Scala. And it
was like six lines of
code. And it's just like,
what is happening here? I
don't, you know what I
mean? There's just so there's
so much in such a
short amount of space. Yeah.
I think what I've been
asking people to think about
is that terseness like, where
is it too much? And
I think it's really important
that your team be able
to read your code. It's
really important that other people
be able to read your
code. And it's really important
that you're able to read
your code when you come
back to it after vacation.
Right? So writing something in
the most terse format ever
is not the goal here,
you know, write it, write
your code to be readable
and you can write readable
code in Scala. I think
a lot of what we
saw and a lot of
damage that was done or
that can be done in
any language with early adopters
is that the early adopters
get very excited by how
terse they can make their
code, look at the cool
thing I can do. Right.
And so then that becomes
what's on stack overflow. That
becomes what people find when
they're searching on the internet.
And that those are the
examples that they see. And
they're like, Oh no, it
looks like Pearl, but it
doesn't have to, those are
just what the early adopters
were doing. Right. And so
it was a bad representation.
Yeah, it was cool. But
it's not the code that
you want to write for
production. Right. When those, th
those are unfortunate that when
the, the early adopter enthusiast
sees it and then starts
to push on it, to
see how far it can
take it, the same thing
happened with link where it's
like, you know, here's a
Ray tracer in one line
of code, and it's like,
Oh, no, this is impossible.
What am I going to
do? You know, it's, it's
great that they did that,
but it, for the, for
the newbie to go and
look at that it's difficult.
And I think this is
a larger problem than with
functional languages, because people who
like math and the expressiveness
of math and understand math
at a cellular level, love
writing terse equations and small
proofs and things like that,
whether it be Scala or
Haskell or F sharp, it's
like how small and efficient
can I get this to
look like a mathematical function?
How does someone make that
jump from procedural to functional
when there are these barriers
that stand in the way?
Yeah. I think those barriers
are in our own heads,
right? And I think that,
you know, it's just, it's
that muscle we're not exercising.
And it was funny because
when we first started writing
atomic Scala, we thought maybe
we'll have two volumes, maybe
volume one will be object
oriented scholar, and maybe volume
two will be functional scholar.
And as we started writing
the book, we thought we
realized that we were bringing
our own bias as developers
with lots of object oriented
experience into the book. So
we were writing a book
for beginning programmers and thinking,
Hey, they may not have
experience with object during your
programming. So why are we
perpetuating this idea? That object
oriented programming is, is easier
than functional programming. When all
of us know how to
do math and how to
represent mathematical equations, it may
actually be the case that
people are just as able
to adopt functional programming as
a concept as they are,
or maybe even easier than
they are to adapt object
oriented programming. And for example,
I suspect that my husband,
who's an engineer and a
laser scientist who writes programs
and MATLAB lab all day
long, would find Scala much
easier than what he would
then, then, then Java or
C sharp or C plus
plus Isn't that because when
you're writing something in a
C family or procedural language,
that you're your writing, a
series of steps, now do
this, and now do that.
Now do this in a
loop. Wow. When you're doing
something functionally, you really have
to, and I don't want
to insult anybody, but you
have to really understand the
problem. Like when you doing
something procedurally, you can just
kind of step one, step
two, step three, didn't work
out. I'm going to just
back up and try a
different step three. Well, when
you do something functionally, you
have to really get what
you're trying to do. You
have to really understand the
problem from end to end
and then express it in
a function. Like if you
think about recursion, you know,
like that was one of
the big things in computer
science class, that early programmers,
like you either get it,
or you don't, and then
one day it clicks, but
you have to really visualize
and internalize and grok what's
happening. And I think that
a lot of people don't
really know what they're trying
to accomplish when they sit
down and they start typing.
You know what I mean?
Yeah. Maybe we should step
back from the keyboard a
little bit That right there.
I mean, I think that
languages that are expressive and
tourists, like this require an
understanding of the problem space
that requires sitting quietly with
your hands at your lap,
not on your keyboard, thinking
about what the problem I'm
trying to solve is, especially
when you're going to issues
like concurrency. Yeah. And I
think one night. So I
think that there are some
functional programming languages that are,
are unapproachable because you have
to really grok that functional
aspect before you can be
productive in a language. And
what I liked about Scala
was I could ease into
that water. I could, you
know, I could still write
my very procedural code in
Scala, the, the experience scholar
program, or would come back
and say, Oh, you know,
it's not very idiomatic, but
I can get better. You
know, I can, I can
learn and I can, I
can watch what other people
are doing and I can
grow my functional sort of
muscle back. You know, I
used to think recursively, right
back when I was in
college, I stopped thinking recursively
as, as I got older
and, you know, potentially more
lazy, you know, in my,
in my, like you said,
you know, I continued to
write the same code year
after year, after year after
year, you know, and I
stopped exercising that muscle. You
know, it just, I think
it just takes a little
bit more time to get
that back and to start
thinking, you know, once you
kind of understand the way
recursion works, it's pretty obvious,
you know? And so it's
easier to decompose the problem,
but you have to really
remember the secret of how
you're actually looping through things
and, you know, calling with
previous state, you know, as,
as part of the method
itself. And I think that
it's, it's a way of
thinking that we're, we've become
inexperienced at using. There's a,
a kind of developer that
I gave an ARCA title
name to. We call them
the dark matter developers. They
take up most of the
space of the universe, but
we can't prove that they
exist just like dark matter.
And well, there's so much
enthusiasm around the JVM kind
of derivative languages like Scala
and closure and groovy. And
it seems like everyone who
is smart and loud on
the internet is doing those
things. If you look at
the math behind it and
the actual like popularity, you
know, Scala doesn't even break
the top 30 languages. It's
down there with Earl Lang
and prologue and Haskell, which
are great languages, but the
dark matter developer doesn't use
them. Java is got popularity
right now. Why, why is
it that loud, enthusiastic, smart
people talk about languages like
Scala and groovy enclosure while
the enterprise person just keeps
banging out JSP pages. Gosh,
That's a hard question to
solve because when you have
the mentality that you joined
this industry, because it was
evolving and ever changing, and
it was a, it was
basically a dedication to a
career of learning. It's hard
to identify with people who
are perfectly happy doing what
they were doing 10, 15
years ago. Right. It's, it's
absolutely impossible for me to
put myself in their shoes.
All I know is that
I, I, I am fairly
lazy in programming in terms
of I'd rather write less
code and spend more time
thinking about the problem domain.
And, and so I think
that the newer languages offer
me that ability. They also
let the, let the problem
that I am trying to
solve emerge from the code
more readily and make that
more apparent when I'm looking
at the code, because it's,
there's, it's not hidden by
all the boiler plate. And
so for me, it's easier
to solve these problems using
newer languages, because I get
to hide away all that
cruft that was taking up
space in my brain. But
I think that there are
a large number of people
that will never touch who
are perfectly happy, who don't
listen to this podcast, who
don't listen to any podcasts
who don't go to conferences
who are perfectly happy doing
programming nine to five and
not thinking about it on
the weekends and, and, and
never really thinking about where
their career is going. Cause
they have a job and
their job is to write
Java code. And when Java
becomes the language that nobody
uses anymore, then there'll be
unemployed. And then they'll, they'll
learn by the very necessity
of learning a new language
so that they can get
a job. Again, the learn,
whatever new language it is,
then look at another job
and they'll repeat the same
mistakes over and over again.
Is there, is there a
kind of an implicit value
judgment in that? I mean,
there's, I mean, you do
the kind of is, I
mean, we're not saying that
there, we're not saying that
it's not about punching out
at five o'clock or not.
I mean, you can have
a very good career and
a successful career, not thinking
about these things on the
weekends, but I think your,
when you said thinking about
it on the weekends, you're
really talking about, it's like,
if you're a craftsman who
makes things with wood and
you watch like the Yankee
workshop, you know, it's like,
it's something that you're so
excited about. And you're always
thinking about new and effective
ways to make wood and
make the wood bend to
your will because you just
love it. Is this the
difference between just loving computer
science and software engineering and
just kind of like, Oh,
it's a job. Yeah. I
think it is. I think
it's that the person who
loves computer science and software
is the, is the person
who can't turn their brain
off. Right. And so I'm
not asking, I'm not saying
that I go home and
work all night long and
that I don't have a
life. Right. I think especially
one thing I noticed here
at Netflix, because we tend
to hire developers who have
experienced, we don't have a
culture that really has people
coming in and staying through
all hours of the night.
What I've seen here is
that people tend to arrive
around nine o'clock after they
drop their kids off at
school, they tend to stay
until five or six when
they're going to go pick
their kids up from school.
And then they go home
and they, you know, they,
they, they do some more
work, but if that's what
they need to do for
their job, they work really
super hard when they're here,
you know, and then they
go home and they're, they
don't shut their brains off.
They may not actually be
fingers on keyboard, but they're
thinking about interesting problems and
they can't help themselves. That's
cool. I guess if you're
going to have a dysfunction,
that's the right kind of
have. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it
sounds like it's really exciting
and stuff that's happening at
Netflix. And thanks so much
for talking to me about
Scala and for having clay
on to talk about groovy
and people of course can
follow you on Twitter and
learn more about your stuff
as all, as well as
go up to get hub
and see all the great
things that Netflix is putting
out into the open source
world. Yeah. It's really exciting
and really fun. And you
know, it's part of us
giving back to the community
for having used a lot
of open source in our
software and, and really helping
to help other people adopt
the cloud. So it's, it's
a pretty fun 35, I
think, projects now on get
hub, including one of clay,
clay, McCoy's who you talked
to a couple weeks ago,
one of his projects is
out there called glisten. So
pretty exciting stuff. That's fantastic.
Thanks so much. Diane Marsh from
Netflix for talking to me
today. Thanks, Scott. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.